Task 1. Initialize your lab
In this task, you set up your environment:

Import your project ID and project number as variables
Enable the APIs for GKE, Cloud Build, Secret Manager, and Artifact Analysis
Create an Artifact Registry Docker repository
Create a GKE cluster to deploy the sample application of this lab
In Cloud Shell, run the following command to set your project ID and project number. Save them as PROJECT_ID and PROJECT_NUMBER variables:
export PROJECT_ID=$(gcloud config get-value project)
export PROJECT_NUMBER=$(gcloud projects describe $PROJECT_ID --format='value(projectNumber)')
export REGION=europe-west1
gcloud config set compute/region $REGION
Copied!
Next, you prepare your Google Cloud Project for use by enabling the required APIs, initializing the git configuration in Cloud Shell, and downloading the sample code used later in the lab.

Run the following command to enable the APIs for GKE, Cloud Build, Secret Manager and Artifact Analysis:
gcloud services enable container.googleapis.com \
    cloudbuild.googleapis.com \
    secretmanager.googleapis.com \
    containeranalysis.googleapis.com
Copied!
Create an Artifact Registry Docker repository named my-repository in the europe-west1 region to store your container images:
gcloud artifacts repositories create my-repository \
  --repository-format=docker \
  --location=$REGION
Copied!
Create a GKE cluster to deploy the sample application of this lab:
  gcloud container clusters create hello-cloudbuild --num-nodes 1 --region $REGION
Copied!
Run the following command to configure Git and GitHub in Cloud Shell:
curl -sS https://webi.sh/gh | sh 
gh auth login 
gh api user -q ".login"
GITHUB_USERNAME=$(gh api user -q ".login")
git config --global user.name "${GITHUB_USERNAME}"
git config --global user.email "${USER_EMAIL}"
echo ${GITHUB_USERNAME}
echo ${USER_EMAIL}
Copied!
Press ENTER to accept the default options. Read the instructions in the CLI tool to GitHub Login with a web browser. If you have logged in successfully, it shows your GitHub username.

Click Check my progress to verify the objective.
Enable services, create an artifact registry and the GKE cluster

Task 2. Create the Git repositories in GitHub repositories
GitHub is a platform where you can store, share, and work together with others to write code. Git is a version control system. When you upload files to GitHub, you store them in a "Git repository." This means that when you make changes (or "commits") to your files in GitHub, Git automatically starts to track and manage your changes. For more detail, refer to About GitHub and Git.

In this task, you create the two Git repositories (hello-cloudbuild-app and hello-cloudbuild-env) and initialize hello-cloudbuild-app with some sample code.

In Cloud Shell, run the following commands to create the two Git repositories:
gh repo create  hello-cloudbuild-app --private 
Copied!
gh repo create  hello-cloudbuild-env --private
Copied!
Download the sample code from Cloud Storage:
cd ~
mkdir hello-cloudbuild-app
Copied!
gcloud storage cp -r gs://spls/gsp1077/gke-gitops-tutorial-cloudbuild/* hello-cloudbuild-app
Copied!
Configure the GitHub repository as a remote:
cd ~/hello-cloudbuild-app
Copied!
export REGION=europe-west1
sed -i "s/us-central1/$REGION/g" cloudbuild.yaml
sed -i "s/us-central1/$REGION/g" cloudbuild-delivery.yaml
sed -i "s/us-central1/$REGION/g" cloudbuild-trigger-cd.yaml
sed -i "s/us-central1/$REGION/g" kubernetes.yaml.tpl
Copied!
PROJECT_ID=$(gcloud config get-value project)
Copied!
git init
git config credential.helper gcloud.sh
git remote add google https://github.com/${GITHUB_USERNAME}/hello-cloudbuild-app
git branch -m master
git add . && git commit -m "initial commit"
Copied!
The code you just cloned contains a simple "Hello World" application:

from flask import Flask
app = Flask('hello-cloudbuild')
@app.route('/')
def hello():
  return "Hello World!\n"
if __name__ == '__main__':
  app.run(host = '0.0.0.0', port = 8080)
Task 3. Create a container image with Cloud Build
In this task, with an existing Dockerfile, you use Cloud Build to create and store a container image.

The code you previously cloned contains the Docker file:

FROM python:3.7-slim
RUN pip install flask
WORKDIR /app
COPY app.py /app/app.py
ENTRYPOINT ["python"]
CMD ["/app/app.py"]
With this Dockerfile, you can use Cloud Build to create a container image and store it in Artifact Registry.

In Cloud Shell, create a Cloud Build build based on the latest commit with the following command:
cd ~/hello-cloudbuild-app
Copied!
COMMIT_ID="$(git rev-parse --short=7 HEAD)"
Copied!
gcloud builds submit --tag="${REGION}-docker.pkg.dev/${PROJECT_ID}/my-repository/hello-cloudbuild:${COMMIT_ID}" .
Copied!
Cloud Build streams the logs generated by the creation of the container image to your terminal when you execute the command.

After the build finishes, in the Google title bar, enter Artifact Registry in the Search field, and then click Artifact Registry in the search results. Verify that your new container image is indeed available in Artifact Registry. Click my-repository to see the hello-cloudbuild image in the Image list.
Click Check my progress to verify the objective.
Create the container image with Cloud Build

Task 4. Create the Continuous Integration (CI) pipeline
In this task, you configure Cloud Build to automatically run a small unit test, build the container image, and then push it to Artifact Registry. Pushing a new commit to GitHub repositories triggers this pipeline automatically.

Architecture

The cloudbuild.yaml file, already included in the code, is the pipeline's configuration.

In the console title bar, enter Cloud Build triggers in the Search field, and then click Triggers in the search results.

Click Create Trigger.

For Name, type hello-cloudbuild. Set Region to europe-west1.

Set Event to Push to a branch.

Under Source, for Repository, click Connect new repository.

Select GitHub (Cloud Build GitHub App). Click Continue.

Authenticate to your source repository with your username and password.

Select [your-github-username]/hello-cloudbuild-app for Repository. Click OK.

a. If you get the pop up "The GitHub App is not installed on any of your repositories", follow these steps.

i. Click **Install Google Cloud Build**. Install the Cloud Build GitHub App in your personal account. Permit the installation using your GitHub account.

ii. Under **Repository access**. Choose **Only select repositories**. Click the **Select the repositories** menu and select **_[your-github-username]_/hello-cloudbuild-app** and **_[your-github-username]_/hello-cloudbuild-env**.

iii. Click **Install**.
Copied!
b. If the Cloud Build GitHub App is already installed in your account, you get the option to Edit Repositories on GitHub.

 i. Under Repository access choose Only select repositories. Click the Select repositories menu and select the repository **_[your-github-username]_/hello-cloudbuild-app** and **_[your-github-username]_/hello-cloudbuild-env**.

 ii. Click Save.
Copied!
Accept I understand that GitHub content for the selected repositories....

Click Connect.

For Branch type *. (any branch)**.

In the Configuration section, set Type to Cloud Build configuration file.

In the Location field, type cloudbuild.yaml after the /.

Set Service account to the Compute Engine default service account.

Click Create.

When the trigger is created, return to the Cloud Shell. You now need to push the application code to GitHub repositories to trigger the CI pipeline in Cloud Build.

To start this trigger, run the following command:
cd ~/hello-cloudbuild-app
Copied!
git add .
Copied!
git commit -m "Type Any Commit Message here"
Copied!
git push google master
Copied!
Still on the Cloud Build page, in the left pane, click Dashboard.
You should see a build running or having recently finished. You can click the build to follow its execution and examine its logs.
Click Check my progress to verify the objective.
Create the Continuous Integration (CI) Pipeline

Task 5. Accessing GitHub from a build via SSH keys
In this step use the Secret Manager with Cloud Build to access private GitHub repositories.

Create a SSH key
In Cloud Shell, change to the home directory.

cd ~
Copied!
Create a new directory named workingdir and navigate to it:

mkdir workingdir
cd workingdir
Copied!
Create a new GitHub SSH key, replace [your-github-email] with your personal GitHub email address:

ssh-keygen -t rsa -b 4096 -N '' -f id_github -C [your-github-email]
Copied!
This step creates two files, id_github and id_github.pub.

In the Cloud Shell action bar, click More (More icon) and then Download > Toggle file browser and select the dropdown and workingdir folder to download the id_github file on your local machine.
Store the private SSH key in Secret Manager
In the console title bar, enter Secret Manager, and then click Secret Manager in the search results.

Click Create Secret.

Set Name to ssh_key_secret.

Set Secret value to Upload and upload your id_github file.

Leave other settings at their defaults.

Click Create secret.

This uploads your id_github file to Secret Manager.

Add the public SSH key to your private repository's deploy keys
Login to your personal GitHub account

In the top right corner, click your profile photo, then click Your profile.

On your profile page, click Repositories, then click the hello-cloudbuild-env repository.

From your repository, click Settings.

In the left pane, click Deploy Keys, then click Add deploy key.

Provide the title SSH_KEY, paste your public SSH key from workingdir/id_github.pub from Cloud Shell.

Select Allow write access so this key has write access to the repository. A deploy key with write access lets a deployment push to the repository.

Click Add key.

Delete the SSH key from your disk:

rm id_github*
Copied!
Grant the service account permission to access Secret Manager
Enter the following command to give the service account access to Secret Manager:

gcloud projects add-iam-policy-binding ${PROJECT_NUMBER} \
--member=serviceAccount:${PROJECT_NUMBER}-compute@developer.gserviceaccount.com \
--role=roles/secretmanager.secretAccessor
Copied!
Click Check my progress to verify the objective.
Accessing GitHub from a build via SSH keys

Task 6. Create the test environment and CD pipeline
You can also use Cloud Build for the continuous delivery pipeline. The pipeline runs each time a commit is pushed to the candidate branch of the hello-cloudbuild-env repository. The pipeline applies the new version of the manifest to the Kubernetes cluster and, if successful, copies the manifest over to the production branch. This process has the following properties:

The candidate branch is a history of the deployment attempts.
The production branch is a history of the successful deployments.
You have a view of successful and failed deployments in Cloud Build.
You can rollback to any previous deployment by re-executing the corresponding build in Cloud Build. A rollback also updates the production branch to truthfully reflect the history of deployments.
Next, you modify the continuous integration pipeline to update the candidate branch of the hello-cloudbuild-env repository, triggering the continuous delivery pipeline.

Grant Cloud Build access to GKE
To deploy the application in your Kubernetes cluster, Cloud Build needs the Kubernetes Engine Developer Identity and the Access Management role.

In Cloud Shell, execute the following command:
cd ~
PROJECT_NUMBER="$(gcloud projects describe ${PROJECT_ID} --format='get(projectNumber)')"
Copied!
gcloud projects add-iam-policy-binding ${PROJECT_NUMBER} \
--member=serviceAccount:${PROJECT_NUMBER}@cloudbuild.gserviceaccount.com \
--role=roles/container.developer
Copied!
You need to initialize the hello-cloudbuild-env repository with two branches (production and candidate) and a Cloud Build configuration file describing the deployment process.

The first step is to clone the hello-cloudbuild-env repository and create the production branch, which is still empty.

In Cloud Shell, download the sample code from Cloud Storage:
mkdir hello-cloudbuild-env
gcloud storage cp -r gs://spls/gsp1077/gke-gitops-tutorial-cloudbuild/* hello-cloudbuild-env
Copied!
cd hello-cloudbuild-env
export REGION=europe-west1
sed -i "s/us-central1/$REGION/g" cloudbuild.yaml
sed -i "s/us-central1/$REGION/g" cloudbuild-delivery.yaml
sed -i "s/us-central1/$REGION/g" cloudbuild-trigger-cd.yaml
sed -i "s/us-central1/$REGION/g" kubernetes.yaml.tpl
Copied!
For Cloud Build to connect to GitHub, you must add the public SSH key to the known_hosts file in Cloud Build's build environment. In your hello-cloudbuild-env directory, create a file named known_hosts.github, add the public SSH key to this file, and provide the necessary permission to the file:
cd ~/hello-cloudbuild-env
ssh-keyscan -t rsa github.com > known_hosts.github
chmod +x known_hosts.github
Copied!
git init
git config credential.helper gcloud.sh
git remote add google https://github.com/${GITHUB_USERNAME}/hello-cloudbuild-env
git branch -m master
git add . && git commit -m "initial commit"
git push google master
Copied!
cd ~/hello-cloudbuild-env
Copied!
git checkout -b production
Copied!
Next, replace the cloudbuild.yaml file available in the hello-cloudbuild-env repository and commit the change:
cd ~/hello-cloudbuild-env
Copied!
Replace the cloudbuild.yaml in the hello-cloudbuild-env repository with the code below. Replace [your-github-username] with your personal GitHub username:
# Copyright 2018 Google LLC
#
# Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
# you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
# You may obtain a copy of the License at
#
#     https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
#
# Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
# distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
# WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
# See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
# limitations under the License.

# [START cloudbuild-delivery]
steps:
# This step deploys the new version of our container image
# in the hello-cloudbuild Kubernetes Engine cluster.
- name: 'gcr.io/cloud-builders/kubectl'
  id: Deploy
  args:
  - 'apply'
  - '-f'
  - 'kubernetes.yaml'
  env:
  - 'CLOUDSDK_COMPUTE_REGION=europe-west1'
  - 'CLOUDSDK_CONTAINER_CLUSTER=hello-cloudbuild'

# Access the id_github file from Secret Manager, and setup SSH
- name: 'gcr.io/cloud-builders/git'
  secretEnv: ['SSH_KEY']
  entrypoint: 'bash'
  args:
  - -c
  - |
    echo "$$SSH_KEY" >> /root/.ssh/id_rsa
    chmod 400 /root/.ssh/id_rsa
    cp known_hosts.github /root/.ssh/known_hosts
  volumes:
  - name: 'ssh'
    path: /root/.ssh

# Clone the repository
- name: 'gcr.io/cloud-builders/git'
  args:
  - clone
  - --recurse-submodules
  - git@github.com:${GITHUB-USERNAME}/hello-cloudbuild-env.git
  volumes:
  - name: ssh
    path: /root/.ssh

# This step copies the applied manifest to the production branch
# The COMMIT_SHA variable is automatically
# replaced by Cloud Build.
- name: 'gcr.io/cloud-builders/gcloud'
  id: Copy to production branch
  entrypoint: /bin/sh
  args:
  - '-c'
  - |
    set -x && \
    cd hello-cloudbuild-env && \
    git config user.email $(gcloud auth list --filter=status:ACTIVE --format='value(account)')
    sed "s/GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT/${PROJECT_ID}/g" kubernetes.yaml.tpl | \
    git fetch origin production && \
    # Switch to the production branch and copy the kubernetes.yaml file from the candidate branch
    git checkout production && \
    git checkout $COMMIT_SHA kubernetes.yaml && \
    # Commit the kubernetes.yaml file with a descriptive commit message
    git commit -m "Manifest from commit $COMMIT_SHA
    $(git log --format=%B -n 1 $COMMIT_SHA)" && \
    # Push the changes back to Cloud Source Repository
    git push origin production
  volumes:
  - name: ssh
    path: /root/.ssh

availableSecrets:
  secretManager:
  - versionName: projects/${PROJECT_NUMBER}/secrets/ssh_key_secret/versions/1
    env: 'SSH_KEY'

# [END cloudbuild-delivery]
options:
  logging: CLOUD_LOGGING_ONLY
Copied!
git add .
Copied!
git commit -m "Create cloudbuild.yaml for deployment"
Copied!
The cloudbuild.yaml file describes the deployment process to be run in Cloud Build. It has two steps:

Cloud Build applies the manifest to the GKE cluster.
If successful, Cloud Build copies the manifest on the production branch.
Create a candidate branch and push both branches for them to be available in GitHub Repositories:
git checkout -b candidate
Copied!
git push google production
Copied!
git push google candidate
Copied!
Create the trigger for the continuous delivery pipeline
In the console title bar, enter Cloud Build Triggers, and then click Triggers.

Click Create Trigger.

Set Name to hello-cloudbuild-deploy. Set Region to europe-west1.

Under Event, select Push to a branch.

Under Source, for Repository click Connect new repository.

a. Select GitHub (Cloud Build GitHub App). Click Continue.

b. Authenticate to your source repository with your GitHub username and password.

c. Select [your-github-username]/hello-cloudbuild-env repository. Click OK.

d. Select I understand that GitHub content for the selected repositories..

e. Click Connect.

Under Repository select [your-github-username]/hello-cloudbuild-env.

Under Source, select ^candidate$ as your Branch.

Under Build configuration, select Cloud Build configuration file.

In the Cloud Build configuration file location field, type cloudbuild.yaml after the /.

Set Service account to the Compute Engine default service account.

Click Create.

In your hello-cloudbuild-app directory, create a file named known_hosts.github, add the public SSH key to this file and provide the necessary permission to the file:

cd ~/hello-cloudbuild-app
ssh-keyscan -t rsa github.com > known_hosts.github
chmod +x known_hosts.github
Copied!
git add .
git commit -m "Adding known_host file."
git push google master
Copied!
Modify the continuous integration pipeline to trigger the continuous delivery pipeline
Next, add some steps to the continuous integration pipeline that generated a new version of the Kubernetes manifest and push it to the hello-cloudbuild-env repository to trigger the continuous delivery pipeline.

Copy the extended version of the cloudbuild.yaml file for the app repository:
cd ~/hello-cloudbuild-app
Copied!
The cloudbuild.yaml file adds the steps that generate the new Kubernetes manifest and trigger the continuous delivery pipeline.

Configure the build
Replace the cloudbuild.yaml in the hello-cloudbuild-app repository with the code below. Replace ${GITHUB-USERNAME} with your GitHub username.

# Copyright 2018 Google LLC
#
# Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
# you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
# You may obtain a copy of the License at
#
#     https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
#
# Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
# distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
# WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
# See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
# limitations under the License.

# [START cloudbuild]
steps:
# This step runs the unit tests on the app
- name: 'python:3.7-slim'
  id: Test
  entrypoint: /bin/sh
  args:
  - -c
  - 'pip install flask && python test_app.py -v'

# This step builds the container image.
- name: 'gcr.io/cloud-builders/docker'
  id: Build
  args:
  - 'build'
  - '-t'
  - 'europe-west1-docker.pkg.dev/$PROJECT_ID/my-repository/hello-cloudbuild:$SHORT_SHA'
  - '.'

# This step pushes the image to Artifact Registry
# The PROJECT_ID and SHORT_SHA variables are automatically
# replaced by Cloud Build.
- name: 'gcr.io/cloud-builders/docker'
  id: Push
  args:
  - 'push'
  - 'europe-west1-docker.pkg.dev/$PROJECT_ID/my-repository/hello-cloudbuild:$SHORT_SHA'
# [END cloudbuild]

# Access the id_github file from Secret Manager, and setup SSH
- name: 'gcr.io/cloud-builders/git'
  secretEnv: ['SSH_KEY']
  entrypoint: 'bash'
  args:
  - -c
  - |
    echo "$$SSH_KEY" >> /root/.ssh/id_rsa
    chmod 400 /root/.ssh/id_rsa
    cp known_hosts.github /root/.ssh/known_hosts
  volumes:
  - name: 'ssh'
    path: /root/.ssh

# Clone the repository
- name: 'gcr.io/cloud-builders/git'
  args:
  - clone
  - --recurse-submodules
  - git@github.com:${GITHUB-USERNAME}/hello-cloudbuild-env.git
  volumes:
  - name: ssh
    path: /root/.ssh

# [START cloudbuild-trigger-cd]
# This step clones the hello-cloudbuild-env repository
- name: 'gcr.io/cloud-builders/gcloud'
  id: Change directory
  entrypoint: /bin/sh
  args:
  - '-c'
  - |
    cd hello-cloudbuild-env && \
    git checkout candidate && \
    git config user.email $(gcloud auth list --filter=status:ACTIVE --format='value(account)')
  volumes:
  - name: ssh
    path: /root/.ssh

# This step generates the new manifest
- name: 'gcr.io/cloud-builders/gcloud'
  id: Generate manifest
  entrypoint: /bin/sh
  args:
  - '-c'
  - |
     sed "s/GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT/${PROJECT_ID}/g" kubernetes.yaml.tpl | \
     sed "s/COMMIT_SHA/${SHORT_SHA}/g" > hello-cloudbuild-env/kubernetes.yaml
  volumes:
  - name: ssh
    path: /root/.ssh

# This step pushes the manifest back to hello-cloudbuild-env
- name: 'gcr.io/cloud-builders/gcloud'
  id: Push manifest
  entrypoint: /bin/sh
  args:
  - '-c'
  - |
    set -x && \
    cd hello-cloudbuild-env && \
    git add kubernetes.yaml && \
    git commit -m "Deploying image europe-west1-docker.pkg.dev/$PROJECT_ID/my-repository/hello-cloudbuild:${SHORT_SHA}
    Built from commit ${COMMIT_SHA} of repository hello-cloudbuild-app
    Author: $(git log --format='%an <%ae>' -n 1 HEAD)" && \
    git push origin candidate
  volumes:
  - name: ssh
    path: /root/.ssh
availableSecrets:
  secretManager:
  - versionName: projects/${PROJECT_NUMBER}/secrets/ssh_key_secret/versions/1
    env: 'SSH_KEY'

# [END cloudbuild-trigger-cd]
options:
  logging: CLOUD_LOGGING_ONLY
Copied!
Note: This pipeline uses a simple sed to render the manifest template. In reality, you benefit from using a dedicated tool such as kustomize or skaffold as they allow more control over manifest template rendering.
Commit the modifications and push them to GitHub Repositories:
cd ~/hello-cloudbuild-app
Copied!
git add cloudbuild.yaml
Copied!
git commit -m "Trigger CD pipeline"
Copied!
git push google master
Copied!
This triggers the continuous integration pipeline in Cloud Build.

Click Check my progress to verify the objective.
Create the Test Environment and CD Pipeline

Task 7. Review Cloud Build pipeline
In this task, you review the Cloud Build pipeline in the console.

In the console, still in the Cloud Build page, click Dashboard in the left pane.
Click the hello-cloudbuild-app trigger to follow its execution and examine its logs. The last step of this pipeline pushes the new manifest to the hello-cloudbuild-env repository, which triggers the continuous delivery pipeline.
Return to the main Dashboard.
You should see a build either running or recently finished for the hello-cloudbuild-env repository.
You can click on the build to follow its execution and examine its logs.

Task 8. Test the complete pipeline
You've now configured the complete CI/CD pipeline. In this task you perform an end to end test.

In the console, in the Navigation menu (Navigation menu icon), click Kubernetes Engine > Gateways, Services & Ingress > Services.
There should be a single service called hello-cloudbuild in the list. It has been created by the continuous delivery build that just ran.

Click on the endpoint for the hello-cloudbuild service. You should see "Hello World!". If there is no endpoint, or if you see a load balancer error, you may have to wait a few minutes for the load balancer to completely initialize. If needed, click Refresh to update the page.
App 1 Hello World!

In Cloud Shell, replace "Hello World" with "Hello Cloud Build", both in the application and in the unit test:
cd ~/hello-cloudbuild-app
Copied!
sed -i 's/Hello World/Hello Cloud Build/g' app.py
Copied!
sed -i 's/Hello World/Hello Cloud Build/g' test_app.py
Copied!
Commit and push the change to GitHub repositories:
git add app.py test_app.py
Copied!
git commit -m "Hello Cloud Build"
Copied!
git push google master
Copied!
This triggers the full CI/CD pipeline.
After a few minutes, reload the application in your browser. You should now see "Hello Cloud Build!".

App 2 Hello Cloud Build!

Task 9. Test the rollback
In this task, you rollback to the version of the application that said "Hello World!".

In the console title bar, type Cloud Build Dashboard in the Search field, and then click Cloud Build in the search results. Be sure Dashboard is selected in the left pane.
Click the View all link under Build History for the hello-cloudbuild-env repository.
Click on the second most recent build available.
Click Rebuild.
Rollback success screen

When the build is finished, reload the application in your browser. You should now see "Hello World!" again.

App 1 Hello World!